= Rdoctest

http://github.com/stephencelis/rdoctest

A {doctest}[http://docs.python.org/py3k/library/doctest.html] for Ruby.


== Why?

You'll improve your test coverage and documentation in one fell swoop.


== How?

Install the gem:

  % [sudo] gem install rdoctest


Use the CLI:

  % rdoctest lib/**/*.rb
  Loaded suite /.../bin/rdoctest
  Started
  .
  Finished in ... seconds.

  1 tests, 7 assertions, 0 failures, 0 errors, 0 skips


== Examples

=== Formatting

Rdoctest expects well-formatted RDoc. This means:

* Indent examples by 2 spaces.

    # For example:
    #
    #   1 + 1 # This code is indented by 2 spaces.


* If your example is a block of code, use <tt># =></tt> to designate the
  expected result.

    # Short blocks can have the result on the same line:
    #
    #   1 + 1 # => 2
    #
    # Longer blocks can have the result on the line following:
    #
    #   def hello_world
    #     puts "Hello, world!"
    #   end
    #   # => nil


* If your example is an IRB session, use <tt>>></tt> and <tt>=></tt>
  accordingly.

    # Simple:
    #
    #   >> 1 + 1
    #   => 2
    #
    # More complex:
    #
    #   >> def hello_world
    #   >>   puts "Hello, world!"
    #   >> end
    #   => nil
    #   >> hello_world
    #   Hello, world!
    #   => nil
    #
    # Use ellipses for partial matches:
    #
    #   >> goodbye_world
    #   NameError: undefined local variable or method `goodbye_world'...


=== CLI

Rdoctest's CLI works a lot like Ruby's.

  % rdoctest -h
  Usage: rdoctest [options] [file ...]
      -Idirectory
      -rlibrary
      ...

If you're testing a complex project, make sure you prepare necessary libraries
and load paths:

  % rdoctest -Ilib -rmylibrary lib/**/*.rb


=== Rake

Rdoctest comes with a Rake task that you can load in your Rakefile.

  require 'rdoctest/task'
  Rdoctest::Task.new


And run in your project:

  % rake doctest


It comes with a similar configuration to Rake's TestTask.

  Rdoctest::Task.new :test do |t|
    t.libs      << 'lib'          # The 'lib' directory is loaded by default,
    t.ruby_opts << '-rrdoctest'   # but require needed files with +ruby_opts+.
  end


== Roadmap

* Better detection of code blocks (the 3-space indent is too restrictive).
* Test plain text files (READMEs, for example).
* Autotest integration?
* Test shell snippets (beginning with <tt>$</tt> and <tt>%</tt>)?


== Prior Art

{rubydoctest}[http://github.com/tablatom/rubydoctest].


== License

(The MIT License)

(c) 2010 Stephen Celis <stephen@stephencelis.com>

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
